Project 6

# Cancer Relapse Classification from Gene Expression Data

One really interesting problem in computational molecular medicine, and one that is heavily researched is the prediction of phenotypes (e.g. properties of cancer growths) based on gene expression profiles. For this project, I try to predict the time of relapse among breast cancer patients diagnosed with a malignant tumor. In particular, I consider patients with ER+ (estrogen receptor positive) disease who were treated with surgery or surgery and radiation, and untreated with systemic hormonal therapy and/or chemotherapy. Of these, I consider 2 categories of patients: 'NoRelapse' patients who did not relapse for the duration of the 6.5 year study and 'Relapse' patients who did. The researchers did post-study follow-ups, and there were indeed patients in the study who relapsed after 6.5 years, but they have been excluded from my data. The data come from DNA microarrays. The data compose a matrix where each row represents an anonymized patient and each column represents the expression level for a particular gene. Without diving too deep into the biochemical methods behind gathering the data, I just wanted to provide a brief overview of what 'DNA microarray data' actually is. A microarray is a collection of small DNA spots attached to a solid surface. In microarray experiments, the signal collected from each spot is used to estimate the expression level of a gene. A microarray contains thousands of DNA spots, covering almost every gene in a genome. To make the gene expression levels more comparable between genes, the data have been normalized. This makes it so the numbers in the dataframe are not the true expression levels, but are slighly altered so we can interpret and compare these numbers across genes (the I gathered the normalized data, so I did not have to do any extra preprocessing beforehand). I was particularly lucky because the data I gathered was already clean. There were no missing variables, and as I mentioned before, the were already normalized for interpretability. I then split the data into 2 categories: a training set (the set of patients I use to build my predictive model) and a testing set (the set of patients I use to evaluate how well my model performs). The training set contain 22,215 genes for 212 patients. Of these, 152 patients are categorized as 'NoRelapse' and 60 are categorized as 'Relapse'. The test set also contain 22,215 genes for 212 patients, and of these, 137 are categorized as 'NoRelapse' and 75 as 'Relapse'.